## Background

**[StatisticsView](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/19747-statistics-view)** IntelliJ plugin enables logging IDE code browsing activities and shows aggregated statistical information (e.g. accumulated file opened times) in the IDE Project view. The plugin aims to provide some helpful insight into IDE users' productivity. You can also do some data mining & visualizations base on the raw event logs.

Several reasons that drive me to build StatisticsView:

1. I’ve been working on several cloud services which have lots of dependencies, and I rely heavily on the [Observability](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/observability-primer/#what-is-observability) tools for troubleshooting. One day It came up to me that **smart code navigation** (e.g. _Jump2Definition_, _FindReferences_, _Symbol Search_) in IDE is similar to the concept of Distributed Tracing, where various components are instrumented to record a set of events (e.g. inbound/outbound requests). It can be analyzed/visualized as a “chain of code navigation” and helps with code understanding.
2. The JetBrains IDE provides excellent Code IntelliSense capabilities, it has built-in features like UML class diagrams, and Code vision which provides high-level assistance on cross-concern code understanding based on static analysis. And it also has analytical features relating to dynamic analysis such as Code Coverage, and Profiler. However, human activities data might add some extra insights into code understanding. GitHub Copilot proved that the productivity of developer tools can be enhanced greatly with data. I’m not an expert on machine learning but would like to try some basic statistical analysis based on IDE events. (That’s how the plugin got its name).
3. Another personal reason is that I have been using Go recently and viewing lots of OSS projects, and as someone not that familiar with the language and some conventions of the codebase, I always find myself jumping around and my stack of code understanding quickly overflows after some back and forth. I think I need some kind of event tracking and observability tools along with the IDE to help me concentrate and bring me back to the original point when I get lost.

There have been many plugins dealing with data mining for IDE events, and a particularly excellent one is the [activity-tracker](https://github.com/dkandalov/activity-tracker). So why build one myself?

Most previous plugins focus more on **data recording**. However, having experienced promoting such data collecting tools in an engineering department in a top-down manner (which reached about 1k+ devs), it was clear that developers feel uncomfortable/untruthful about gathering IDE activity data by the employer, even though they know that it's not related to performance evaluation. And they just don’t find it useful for individual productivity, and also doubt about the possible negative impact on IDE performance (not to mention privacy, which is a luxury in some big tech companies).

And some “facts” that these tools revealed — e.g., accumulated coding time per week is merely a handful of hours, measured by total time spans of pure keystroke events — are disturbing to some decision makers. Developers know that they get lots of context switches during daily work and there are also lots of workbenches other than IDE (e.g., CI/CD platforms). It’s quite similar to measuring code velocity with the line of code changed, which makes no sense at all.

So I got the thought that it could be hard to sustain data recording without some usefulness in productivity provided to the individual user. I’d like to build a new plugin showing aggregated statistical information (e.g. accumulated file opened times, where is “root” of my “viewtrace” similar to JVM GC analysis, etc.) as an IDE UI add-on feature. And it must be useful in productivity to myself as a developer first.

And that’s the story of how StatisticsView began. And the current version ([v1.0.1](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/19747-statistics-view)) only provide some easy part and will keep on working on the observability prototype.

> I had a conversation with [Dmitry Kandalov](https://github.com/dkandalov), the author of activity-tracker, and he kindly replied and shared some opinions, which add inspiration to the development of the StatisticsView plugin as well as this article.